A capacitive approach for a low-cost touchscreen
Srikar Baru, Pooja Thaker, Kevin Tomazic




Abstract— A basic touch screen can be created with the use of an RC Circuit. A RC Circuit is a circuit containing a resistor and capacitor connected in series with each other. A RC Circuit can affect the time that it takes for a signal to adjust from high to low. In the case of a touchscreen the person's hand acts as the capacitor in the circuit.


1. Introduction
The touch screen is powered by a square wave that near instantaneously changes from 0V to a higher voltage value. The device uses a resistor capacitor circuit which causes a delay in time for the voltage from going from low to high. When putting your finger to act as a small capacitor it causes the rising edge which also maintains the high signal.
2. Procedure
  

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of our touch circuit.
   
Figure 2. Physical set up of our circuit.
To create the capacitive touch screen, we used an Arduino UNO, the Arduino IDE, one 1MΩ resistor, one 220Ω resistor, one blue LED, jumpers, a breadboard, a paper clip, and a paper. We created the circuit modeled by figure 1. Digital pin 12 is used as an output creating the square wave, digital pin 7 is used to detect a change in the voltage, and digital pin 13 is used to turn on and off the LED. To create the square wave we used the digitalWrite() which controls what is outputted by the digital pin. We used digitalRead() to determine when the wave changes from high to low and vice versa as well as millis(), a function that counts the milliseconds since called. Since when the capacitor is added to the circuit it causes the time to increase for it to reach from low to high we used millis() to determine if there was an increase in time. If it does detect the increased time it would turn the LED on. The touch screen portion of the circuit was made by using graphite on the piece of paper to act as the screen which was attached to the resistor and pin 7.
3. Results & Analysis
`  
Figure 3. The LED turns on and remains on while the paper is touched.


  

Figure 4. The algorithm which determines if a square wave is not found


Prior to physically building and testing our circuit we built and tested it in Tinkercad. Using Tinkercad we were able to use the oscilloscope to beagle to see the rising edge.  This helped us get the working code while we waited to get the materials to use.
The circuit was interrupted successfully, allowing for the Arduino Uno to register when a finger has been detected. When the circuit was interrupted, the finger acted as a capacitor and transformed the square into a linear wave which had different frequencies than the initially generated square wave. The Arduino responded to this change and was able to return our desired output and turned on the LED when touched.
The detection of the finger occurred within 10-50 milliseconds of the actual point of contact, which is within the expected range for a touch screen device.
Despite the general consistency in our experiment, there were some issues in our testing. The circuit was not interrupted by light touches against the circuit and needed more intense contact to detect properly, demonstrating the capacitive nature of a human finger and how it can be used in touch screen technology.
4. Conclusion
We were able to create a basic touch screen via the setup. However, there were a few issues, one of which being the timing. The main reason behind this was the way we kept the time as well as how the function millis() works within the sketch. Another issue that we faced was that the wires and graphite were unable to always detect when touched. This issue could also be related to the resistance being too low making it harder to detect the rising edge since it would be closer to the near instantaneous time of the square wave.